

The Marxist Understanding of the Roots of LGBTQ Oppression

Liberation School









REVOLUTIONARY STRUGGLE AND LGBTQ LIBERATION

Every ruling class in history declares that their order is the “natural” state of society. According to this sort of history—which is really a denial of history—the prevailing forms of oppression are described as inevitable or even morally justiﬁed. This is equally true of the oppression of LGBTQ people, which is a feature of capitalism that can be traced back to the very origins of class society.

In his famous work, The Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State, Frederick Engels drew on existing anthropological evidence to show, that for the vast majority of human existence, people lived communally without any kind of social hierarchy. This has been conﬁrmed and expanded on by many modern anthropologists, including Marxist feminist Evelyn Reed. For thousands of years, human beings struggled alongside one another for survival and the continuation of life in the face of scarcity and deprivation, without forming classes based upon wealth or power.

Engels explained that inequality in society emerged due to the development of tools and methods of production that allowed for the production of a surplus beyond what was needed for survival. This set the basis for one sector of society, primarily males, to be able to hoard and accumulate wealth as private property. Men were the primary hunters and organizers of animal husbandry, although women participated in these tasks as well. Before the advent of private property, there was no special power or privileges associated with this type of labor.

Previously, society had been organized along matrilineal lines: women, the organizers of food, shelter and child rearing, were the center of life in the living spaces of people everywhere. The lineage of any person was traced through the mother’s line.

Children were not the sole responsibility of the biological mother and/or father.

Rather, kinship ties linked children to the brothers and sisters of their mother and community.

PATRIARCHY AND CLASS SOCIETY

As the accumulation of wealth continued and the possessing class continued to grow in number and power, “mother-right” was eventually overturned and replaced by patriarchal forms. This marked the beginning of the development of a society based on inequality, in which a minority came to control the wealth and resources, using organized violence and force to maintain its new position in society.

The overthrow of mother-right and establishment of patriarchal forms resulted in women becoming, in essence, the property of men—a form of domestic slavery.

Female sexuality, once freely expressed, was now severely restricted, in order to assure the “legitimate” line of descent from father to son for the purposes of inheritance. Marriage customs were developed to manage the new property relationships.

Over the course of many centuries, a new patriarchal ideology in support of the new class-based societies and institutions took the place of the old, matrilineal religions that dominated the early period of communal society.

With the rise and expansion of class society and development into feudalism, the severity of the oppression of women, homosexuals and gender non-conforming people intensiﬁed. Under feudalism, people caught or accused of having sexual relations with someone of the same sex or violating the enforced rules of gender expression were brutally persecuted, tortured and put to death, often by being burned alive.

People were required to dress according to strict codes diﬀerentiating men and women. The wearing of the “wrong” forms of clothing was not allowed and those daring to do so were hounded and persecuted.

To survive repression and social isolation, they had to “pass” and hide their true selves. More than clothing alone, even body language or appearance could result in condemnation from the state or by organized religion.

ENTERING THE CAPITALIST ERA

In the aftermath of the bourgeois democratic revolution in France, when the egalitarian spirit was at its high point, homosexuality was decriminalized. But in general, the capitalist ruling classes retained and strengthened anti-LGBTQ laws as they became dominant in Europe, the United States and other parts of the world through colonialism.

The ﬁrst major expressions of a gay rights movement within capitalism took place in the late 1800s. A radical “free love” intellectual movement, making use of early feminist and anti-capitalist theories, challenged the repressive family and gender norms of the Victorian era. In Germany, at the turn of the twentieth century, groups defending homosexuality were formed around writer and doctor Magnus Hirschﬁeld.

A major breakthrough of the era came with the 1917 Russian Revolution, which de-criminalized homosexuality while granting divorce on demand, extending equal rights for women and legalizing abortion. In 1933, the Soviet government reintroduced laws against homosexuality, falsely describing it as a bourgeois decadence of the previous ruling class.

RESISTANCE TO THE STATUS QUO

In the United States, the 1950s was a period of extreme repression. Along with the most vicious anti-communist witchhunts came anti-gay witch-hunts and a period of required “conformity,” which was characterized by the promotion and enforcement of rigid models of behavior and relationships. Nonetheless, this was the period of the ﬁrst sustained U.S. gay rights organizations.

In the 1960s a worldwide upsurge against the status quo developed, with revolutionary movements against colonialism and imperialism, and rebellions from youth and oppressed communities—often gravitating towards socialism. This period of revolutionary struggle included the stirrings of gay, lesbian and transgender communities against centuries of persecution and oppression.

The political movement of the period intersected with a radical youth culture that challenged many gender norms. Even such things as men wearing sandals, beads or pink clothes, or having long hair, earned the wrath of the establishment. Women who wore trousers, suits or ties likewise were attacked in various ways.

The strict norms of behavior were enforced all across society by the various agencies of repression and propaganda of the bourgeoisie.

It is an unfortunate footnote to history that during the peak of anti-communist and anti-gay propaganda most left groups and civil rights organizations, with a few exceptions, failed to stand up to the gaybaiting.

That was to change with the emergence of the modern LGBTQ movement following the Stonewall Rebellion of 1969.

LEADING UP TO THE STONEWALL PERIOD

The Stonewall Rebellion of 1969 in New York City marked a historical moment in the struggle for equality. After centuries of persecution and being forced into the dark shadows of society, people began pouring out of isolation to ﬁght back against homophobia, gay- and trans-bashing, police brutality and discrimination, forging a mass struggle in the streets.

It is important to note the exceptional revolutionary contributions of transgender people in the early days of the Stonewall period.

Barely remembered, but greatly important, transgender people rebelled in the streets of San Francisco in 1965 in what is now known as the Compton’s Cafeteria Riot. The militant rebellion, mainly of transgender people from the Tenderloin district in San Francisco, was one landmark moment that preceded Stonewall.

Signiﬁcantly, activists from the established San Francisco lesbian and gay movement of the time came out the next day to demonstrate in a large display of solidarity with the transgender community.

At the time of Stonewall, many organizations were formed, including those for transgender liberation. The best known, Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries (STAR), was founded by two outstanding transgender women, Marsha P. Johnson and Sylvia Rivera, who are now recognized as some of the great leaders of the early LGBTQ movement. Rivera described the organization, saying “STAR was for the street gay people, the street homeless people, and anybody that needed help at that time.” The group later re-emerged for a short period of time, and changed the “T” in “STAR” to stand for Transgender, reﬂecting developments in language and politics.

FIGHTING RACISM, SEXISM, HOMOPHOBIA AND TRANSPHOBIA

Although this struggle was and is heroic, anti-LGBTQ bigotry and many other evils of capitalism continue with all their brutality. At a time when the wealthy capitalist elites are attacking the standards of living of all workers, unity and determined struggle are key to the period ahead.

The mass incarceration of Black and Latino people, police killings of youth, incidents of gay- and trans-bashing and attacks on immigrants are part of the everyday experiences of our class. Along with these attacks is a well-funded campaign to overturn the gains of the women’s movement.

Capitalism, with its preservation of sexist norms in both the economic base of society and throughout the culture, is an obstacle to true liberation. Today, the struggle for socialism includes building a strong movement for democratic rights that unites working-class and oppressed people. That is why a Marxist analysis of the history of LGBTQ oppression and the development of the LGBTQ movement for equality is an important part of the theoretical roadmap for revolutionary struggle.

Albuquerque Public School Board ‘Parental Rights’ Proposal Part of the National Attack On LGBTQ Rights

Candice Yanez









In July 2022, Albuquerque Public Schools board member Courtney Jackson proposed a new school policy — KB1, or “Parent Rights and Responsibilities.” Jackson’s original version of KB1 would have given parental access to all conﬁdential records like counseling notes and Gender Support Plans.

On Nov. 17, a community of educators, students, members of the teacher’s union, Albuquerque Teachers Federation, and Albuquerque Liberation Center activists spoke out against the dangerous KB1 language at the meeting. Because of this ﬁerce public resistance, the Board of Education removed harmful language from this policy proposal that would have forcefully outed LGBTQ students.

This attempt by board member Jackson is reﬂective of a national strategy of the rightwing to force retractions on democratic rights through a stranglehold over local and state governments. These are the same forces pursuing local school board positions to create policies that ban books or curricula covering racism or LGBTQ rights.

WHERE DID KB1 COME FROM?

The homophobic and transphobic KB1 version was especially supported by the ultra-right-wing group Moms for Liberty (also known as M4L), which used inﬂammatory transphobic and homophobic rhetoric to speak in favor of it. Although the group touts itself as “grassroots,” M4L is a national, well-funded right-wing group founded by elite right-wing operatives supported by far-right politicians and other wealthy donors. M4L has close relationships with the Trump family, Florida Governor Ron DeSantis, Kentucky Senator Rand Paul, PragerU, Parents Defending Education, The Heritage Foundation and Steve Bannon.

The group is a haven for white nationalism. Founded in 2021, M4L has grown to more than 100,000 members in some 200 chapters across 38 states. It is set on strong-arming reactionary policies through local school boards, as one-time Trump strategist and rich white nationalist Steve Bannon stated on his podcast last year: “The path to save the nation is very simple — it’s going to go through the school boards.”

KB1 was inﬂuenced by the precedent of Florida’s “Don’t Say Gay” bill — HB 1557 — passed into law earlier last year. Despite having little support in the broader population, Florida’s “Don’t Say Gay,” a so-called “parental rights bill,” has quickly spread to other states. Inspired by Florida, reactionary groups like M4L and right-wing radicals are trying to introduce similar anti-LGBTQ policies through school boards all around the country from Arizona to Tennessee.

The policy language of KB1 is similar to the right-wing academic transparency laws being pushed across the country by extreme right organizations like the Goldwater Institute. Building on initial success in Florida and Arizona, the organizers and donors expanded the attacks to teachers’ unions, budget cuts, and moving public education funding to support charter schools, vouchers and other privatization eﬀorts.

In total, nine states have passed right-wing education laws. This past November, the Berkeley County School District Board of Education in South Carolina, within just two hours of six M4L-endorsed board members being voted in, ﬁred its ﬁrst Black superintendent and banned the use of what they claim is critical race theory.

When not haranguing school boards, M4L adds titles to a growing list of banned books. The group is one of several that have targeted literature for merely being sympathetic to LGBTQ causes. The growing number of books targeted for banning in 2021 correlates directly to the rise of M4L. M4L is often dismissed as only a fringe group, but it has developed powerful political and wealthy connections to secure campaign wins.

In 2022, M4L endorsed candidates who won board seats in three other South Carolina counties, plus more seats across Florida, Indiana, Minnesota and New Jersey. Overall, there were 270 M4L-endorsed candidates in 2022 alone. Over the summer, M4L held a summit that laid out its long-term strategy. At the summit, former U.S. Secretary of Education and billionaire, Betsy DeVos spoke to the crowd about the need to “end the U.S. Department of Education.”

WHAT’S NEXT IN ALBUQUERQUE?

Although the APS board removed the anti-LGBTQ language of the KB1 policy, the threat that Moms for Liberty poses to New Mexico public education and to public education everywhere must be taken seriously. This organization not only intends to elect its endorsed candidates to dominate school boards, but to ensure that reactionary educational policies are enacted. APS BOE elections will be held next fall in 2023. In December, board members approved a redistricted map that could disenfranchise Latino voters in the upcoming APS BOE election.

This development could allow M4L to add their endorsed candidates to an already conservative AND PACs-funded majority school board to secure strong-arming reactionary policies. On its own, without M4L inﬂuence, the APS school board has pursued anti-teacher and anti-union measures. In August, the board violated Public Employee Labor Relations law by tabling the Negotiated Agreement of the teachers union, ATF. More inﬂuence of M4L on the APS board will only embolden them to push more bigoted and anti-union policies.

The harmful language of the KB1 policy has been beaten back by the grassroots movement of educators, families, students and militant organizers. The ﬁght for a public education free of LGBTQ bigotry is a national struggle against a broader attack on fundamental democratic rights, from voting rights to marriage equality.

A Victory For One Is A Victory For All: Lessons From “Trans Liberation”

Alithia Zamantakis and Aviva Levine









INTRODUCTION

Trans liberation is squarely on the agenda of today’s movements for justice, as over 550 anti-trans bills were already introduced in state legislatures across the country this year. Although 129 have failed because of the people’s resistance, 79 have passed so far [1]. The right-wing oﬀensive against trans rights targets everything from gender-aﬃrming healthcare and participation in sports to inclusive education and drag performances. Attacks on trans people are escalating; in 2022 far fewer laws—174—were proposed with 26 passing [2]. To ﬁght back and strengthen the movement against right-wing assaults we must deepen our understanding of the contemporary LGBTQ struggle. Leslie Feinberg’s Trans Liberation: Beyond Pink or Blue—an accessible book by a historic U.S. ﬁghter for LGBTQ and all oppressed and exploited people—can help us do just that.

Born in Kansas City, MO and raised in Buﬀalo, NY, Feinberg became a militant ﬁghter for socialism and trans liberation. Raised in a family hostile to non-normative sexualities and genders, Feinberg was forced to support hirself during high school. In addition to the exploitation faced by all working-class people, hir status as a Jewish and transgender person made stable work diﬃcult, so Feinberg moved from one part-time or precarious job to another, working in factories, oﬃces, and kitchens. When confronted with discrimination, rather than tearing down the acts or beliefs of an individual Feinberg strove to educate and build camaraderie [3]. Hir organizing, speaking, and writing profoundly inﬂuenced queer and trans struggles. Feinberg’s ﬁrst book, the semi-autobiographical novel Stone Butch Blues, introduced the struggle to political and non-political audiences across the world. It has so far been translated into Mandarin, German, Turkish, Hebrew, and other languages.

Feinberg entered the movement after joining Workers World Party in hir twenties and never stopped struggling in the streets, writing, and theorizing a Marxist conception of the modern LGBTQ movement until her last day in November 2014. Feinberg died at age 65 partially from Lyme disease and other co-infections like Polymyalgia rheumatica but also, or primarily, from the barbaric and bigoted U.S. capitalist healthcare system. Minnie Bruce Pratt (Feinberg’s long-time partner who died in early July 2023), wrote in her obituary that Feinberg used hir last breaths to utter these words: “remember me as a revolutionary communist” [4]. We do and will remember hir as such, as she used hir last years on Earth acting those very words out. While “very ill in Spring 2012,” Feinberg fought at least two signiﬁcant battles simultaneously.

One was the campaign to free political prisoner CeCe McDonald, a young Black transgender student arrested for defending herself and her friends after they were harassed by a cop and attacked by a group of bigots who smashed broken glass in McDonald’s face. As they tried to escape, the bigots followed and continued their attacks that ended after Dean Schmitz, who had a swastika tattoo, was stabbed with a pair of McDonald’s scissors. The bigoted attackers were never charged or arrested, only McDonald. Feinberg traveled to South Minneapolis to visit McDonald behind bars on the ﬁrst day of her trial and was arrested for spray-painting “Free CeCe!” outside the Hennepin County Courthouse where she was sentenced. The 20th anniversary edition of Stone Butch Blues, published in 2014, is dedicated to CeCe McDonald who won release from jail in January of that year. For years, the groundbreaking novel was out of print after the ﬁrst and second small-publishing houses, Firebrand and Alyson, closed. After both publishers went out of business, and even before when Alyson Books stopped publishing books in 2010, Feinberg “had to spend thousands of dollars of my wages on legal fees to recover the right to this novel…. While very ill in Spring 2012, I recovered my rights again.” For two years, Feinberg worked on the 20th anniversary edition and removed it from the marketplace to “give this novel back to the workers and oppressed of the world” [5].

Trans Liberation, composed of talks Feinberg delivered primarily in early 1997, provides the theoretical clarity needed to wage a serious and disciplined struggle. Throughout, Feinberg formulates unity not based on a common identity but on common interests and insists on the necessity to reclaim our repressed knowledge and history of resistance to defeat the system that denies the rights of self-determination and freedom for the vast majority.

SOCIAL & POLITICAL CONTEXT OF FEINBERG’S POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT

LGBTQ organizing ripened in the latter half of the 20th century as activists fought against the oppression of those daring to step outside the rigid conﬁnes of the pink-blue binary, like laws against “cross-dressing” [9]. AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP) formed in 1987 by those “committed to direct action to end the AIDS crisis,” developing rapidly into over 100 chapters [10]. ACT UP inspired the formation of other organizations like Queer Nation, all of which engaged in militant direct action to demand equal opportunities, funding for and access to healthcare and HIV treatment, and an end to anti-queer, anti-trans oppression more generally [11].

Transgender militants long fought in the gay and lesbian liberation movement, women’s liberation movement, and Civil Rights movement [7]. Yet there was not yet a movement for the liberation of transgender people [8]. The formation of groups like the Transvestite-Transsexual Action Organization, the Cockettes, Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries, and Transvestites and Transsexuals didn’t take place until 1969 and 1970.

The book addresses the internal struggles that emerged in the 1990s when a larger transgender liberation movement emerged that, like all mass movements, had various contradictions, such as those emanating from the evolving use of terminology within the community and the medical industry’s shifting diagnostic categorizations of sexualities, which impact access to healthcare, housing, employment, and other social necessities [6]. The book’s subtitle, Beyond Pink or Blue, signals the ongoing need to escape from the narrow conﬁnes of the male-female binary that even encircled some queer activists.

Threading together struggles around healthcare, jobs, a living wage, anti-queer/anti-trans oppression, and more, Feinberg responded to a moment shaped by reactionary policies like the rollback of welfare legislation while military budgets blossomed under the presidencies of Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, and Bill Clinton [12]. In addition to the phenomenon of mass incarceration targeting Black and working-class people, politicians enacted anti-worker legislation like the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,” and the Defense of Marriage Act [13].

AN INJURY TO ONE IS AN INJURY TO ALL AND A VICTORY FOR ONE IS A VICTORY FOR ALL

One of the most important contributions of Trans Liberation is the clear and expansive theoretical understanding of gender oppression articulated based on Marxism, which “gives working and oppressed peoples a roadmap to ﬁnd the path toward liberation” [14]. Writing on the goals of the trans liberation movement, zie recalls the repeated—and to organizers today, still familiar—questions posed by those who don’t share the structural identity of those leading it: “What do I do as a non-trans person to support the struggle?” For Feinberg, “The answer is: There is no formula. There is only this guideline: What would you want a sympathetic stranger to do if you were in a similar situation” [15]? Put diﬀerently, don’t be an ally, become a comrade [16].

Two main themes permeate the speeches. One is the need for building a united movement encompassing all struggles of the oppressed without subsuming them under one. The second is the need to reclaim and recover our true history: the knowledge and resistance of oppressed groups including, in the case of Trans Liberation, the roles LGBTQ people played in struggles for unions, Black liberation, international solidarity, and the freedom of political prisoners, to name a few.

The struggle for trans liberation cannot be conﬁned to those who share the same identity; the LGBTQ movement itself includes various identities. Feinberg sweeps away the grounds for the serious divisions within the gay rights movement over the inclusion of trans people by stressing that trans liberation isn’t “trying to barricade the road you travel” but “trying to open up more avenues to self-deﬁnition, and identity and love and sexuality,” something that beneﬁts humanity as a whole [17].

The primary distinction between liberal identity politics and revolutionary Marxism doesn’t revolve around the importance of identity but rather the question of power. Marxism doesn’t stop at demanding the recognition of identity within the existing society but understands that real self-determination for people of oppressed identities can only be achieved by “the taking of power for the purposes of reorganizing society” in the interests of the people and the planet. [18].

Feinberg places the trans liberation movement as part of the broader struggle for global emancipation. One potent example is Feinberg’s recollection of hir conversation about the Stonewall Rebellion with Sylvia Rivera, a transgender Latina activist who worked with the Young Lords and founded STAR, who participated in the Rebellion:

“I asked her, ‘Were you ﬁghting police brutality? Were you ﬁghting racism? Or for your right to be gay? Did you ﬁght because so few of the queens could produce the military draft cards government agents demanded that night? Or because so many of you were homeless and hungry and embattled on the streets?

“Sylvia replied with quiet dignity, ‘We were ﬁghting for our lives'” [19].

Trans liberation is the ﬁght for working and oppressed people to exist, live, and thrive. “What unites us is not a common sexuality or experiences or identities or self-expression. It’s that we are up against a common enemy,” zie says [20]. Recounting decades of struggling to access healthcare services at all, let alone care facilities free of bigotry, zie concludes hir speech at the 2nd “Transgender Health Conference” at the Boston Convention Center by insisting that “winning more sensitive care for trans people is not enough to save our lives” and that the only way to win free and sensitive healthcare is “by fusing the power of the poorest and most oppressed communities” to win the battle together and for all of us [21]. To build such a force, Feinberg provides a precise and open deﬁnition of unity. In a speech at a queer conference in NYC, Feinberg clariﬁes, “I don’t mean reducing all our particular identities or struggles to one. I mean putting our collective strength and energy behind the demands of all of our identities and all of our demands.” During a speech at the “True Spirit Conference,” zie provides another formulation, telling the audience that solidarity is based on our “commitment to be the best ﬁghters against each other’s oppression,” which means “unity depends on respect for diversity, no matter what tools of language are ultimately used” [22].

The second major theme of Trans Liberation: Beyond Pink or Blue is the reclamation of the existing but subordinated knowledges, histories, and theories of the oppressed. Critically, working and oppressed people need to wrest history from the control of the ruling class. In the hands of our oppressors, knowledge holds us back. But in the hands of the oppressed, it’s “a formidable weapon.” Feinberg witnessed this weapon’s power during the student and community uprisings of the 1960s-1970s, when LGBTQ people, women, Latino, Black, Indigenous, and other oppressed nations rebelled after reviving their subjugated histories. By doing so, we feel the power of our past, present, and future roles as historical agents, connecting separate struggles by identifying the common causes of progressive change. As Feinberg says, recovering our own knowledge and producing our own theory “helped shed light on the relationship between economic exploitation and oppression,” providing “renewed strength and clarity that enabled movements against oppression to exert powerful demands on cultural and educational institutions.” It is not only knowledge but the production of history and theory itself that the struggle requires. “Most working people think theory, in general, doesn’t have much to do with real life,” zie says, which is true when theory is too abstract and isn’t proven through struggle. The oppressed are capable of producing theory and it is particularly “important to those of us who are struggling to transform society because it oﬀers distilled experience so we don’t have to repeat mistakes.” The same is true of history, as we’re taught history is the purview of academics. “Imagine the hypocrisy of telling us we cannot possibly understand history!” [23]. The reality is that the working and oppressed have always been the ones envisioning, ﬁghting for, and realizing new societies and social relations.

We are taught we aren’t capable of theorizing and engaging in historical analysis so the presentation of history and theory of the ruling class prevails over all of society. When theory emerges from and informs struggle, as it does for Marxists, it serves as a tool to build the unity essential for revolutionary transformations, the other theme predominating Trans Liberation.

THE ONGOING STRUGGLE FOR TRANS LIBERATION

Feinberg was writing and speaking during a time of intense right-wing backlash, from the LAPD’s vicious assault on Rodney King in 1991—an assault the cops were charged with but acquitted on—to California’s Proposition 209 which abolished aﬃrmative action in state university admissions in 1996 [24]. As in our time, the broad assaults on basic democratic civil rights can’t be defeated if the movement is internally divided.

In the mid-1990s, political inﬁghting between trans and other queer, gay, lesbian, and bisexual people erupted at the Human Rights Campaign and Congress over the Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA), which didn’t include provisions for trans people when introduced in 1994 and the following two years. Barney Frank, a Democrat representing Massachusetts in the U.S. House of Representatives who publicly identiﬁed as gay, claimed including transgender people would stop ENDA dead in its tracks [25]. While prompting some organizations to include transgender demands, the prevailing argument was to prioritize the “winnable” demands ﬁrst and delay the “harder” wins for later in what Feinberg calls “a trickle-down theory of reform:”

“When a young social movement breaks down societal closet doors and ﬂoods into the streets, its leading activists suddenly begin to get advice from those in power who were never ‘friendly’ before. These advisors urge leaders to send in their ‘best-dressed, most articulate spokespeople’ (code words for white and middle- to upper-classed) to negotiate for progressive legislation and other reforms. But they counsel, ‘Keep it to a single, simple demand. And disassociate with those who are too angry and too militant”’ [26].

The ruling class today is intensifying its attacks against our class, targeting particular sectors in an attempt to divide us. After the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, 24 states banned or severely restricted abortion access [27]. The American Library Association reported 1,269 demands to ban books and materials from public, school, and classroom libraries in 2022, which was almost twice as high as the 729 attempts in 2021, and eight times as high as the 156 attempts documented in 2020. The highest 13 book titles under attack in 2022 included Gender Queer by Maia Kobabe and The Bluest Eye by Toni Morrison [28]. The recent battle against “Critical Race Theory” by AstroTurf conservative groups resulted in 18 states banning books and curricular content that teaches anything about the racist, oppressive, and bigoted history and present of the United States, with other states considering similar bans [29].

Twenty states outlawed gender-aﬃrming care until the age of 18 and seven more are considering doing so, some of which want to ban such care into adulthood. Florida and

Arkansas eﬀectively banned transgender people from using restrooms or locker rooms [30]. The latest attacks add to the ongoing persecution of immigrants, inhumane treatment of migrants at the border, police terror speciﬁcally targeting Black communities, and more. In addition to reactionary domestic policies is the increasing military aggression against Russia and China. They want us to think our enemies are trans people, immigrants, China, Russia, Black people, Native Americans, and women when in reality we are united by a common cause and common enemy. Dividing us only protects the interests of the capitalist class, Feinberg writes, explaining that a “divisive ideological blitz is mandatory in order to ram through these dramatic cuts in our standards of living and our social services. None of us can ﬁght back alone and hope to win, no matter how much we sacriﬁce or how hard we struggle” [31].

Speaking to a range of people at an April 1997 queer graduate studies conference at the City University in New York, Leslie immediately brought the varied audience together by opening with a conception of unity forged through struggle, debate, and political education, not through subsuming diﬀerence. We come together through a desire for a new future, a shared goal, and a collectively forged political line.

Building unity is necessary and possible. We have recent proof. The 2020 revolt against racism and the War on Black America prompted a massive shift in popular consciousness almost overnight. People of all backgrounds, many of whom had never protested before, entered the streets to oppose racist police terror. They began connecting the dots between the role of policing to the capitalist system. This shift from local issues to systemic problems illuminated the interconnection of the struggles against racism and LGBTQ oppression. In a powerful example of how the ﬁght of a particular group is part and parcel of a larger united struggle, 15,000 people marched in Brooklyn in June 2020 stating, “Black Trans lives matter” and demanding an end to the disproportionately high rates of violence faced by Black trans people [32].

Bridging struggles for LGBTQ liberation and Black liberation shows the reality that a truly mass movement can confront the system from which all our various oppressions stem. Transgender communities, Black communities, and the working class as a whole are ﬁghting the constant attempts to reverse our hard-won rights across the U.S. as part of a movement for a larger revolution. As Feinberg wrote:

“Genuine bonds of solidarity can be forged between people who respect each other’s diﬀerences and are willing to ﬁght their enemy together. We are the class that does the work of the world, and can revolutionize it. We can win true liberation” [33].

The AIDS Fight Back: Reﬂections From A Revolutionary

Preston Wood








INTRODUCTION

I remember in the 1980s having to sneak into the hospital to be with my partner, lover, best friend, when he lay dying. Obviously, the hospital administration didn’t consider our life-partner commitment was in any way valid. He was suﬀering with severe pain, clogged airways, and covered with KS lesions (Karposi Sarcoma). He was confused and alone — except for me, plus comrades and friends who were always there.

Once a robust and healthy person, he worked at the phone company, but now was dying a slow and painful death. Earlier, during his illness, the bosses at the phone company told him not to report to work. He deﬁed them and showed up. When they set up a desk in a closet, he called the union and the union rep stepped in to help him.

The employees at the hospital were terriﬁed and rarely entered his room. When they did, they were dressed in Darth Vader-style gear — a terrifying sight for a dying person

It was a new terrifying disease and nobody knew where it came from. At ﬁrst they called in GRID — Gay-Related Immuno-suppressive Disease. Meanwhile, people on the street were talking about a new “gay cancer.” People were dying all the time and everywhere from the disease.

On June 5, 1981, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) reported ﬁve cases of Pneumocystis Carinii Pneumonia in young men. Within just a few years the epidemic would explode, mainly among gay men, IV drug users, plus hemophiliacs from HIV-tainted blood transfusions.

CAPITALIST GOVERNMENT, MEDIA, AND BIGOTS SPREAD BIGOTRY, HATRED, AND FEAR

Instead of recognizing and addressing an emerging global pandemic (over 30 million have died, and over 35 million are currently infected), the U.S ruling establishment pretended it wasn’t happening.

Most liberals, with a few exceptions, cowered and ducked their heads. Right-wing demagogues and bigots of all stripes were seizing the moment to attack and push back the burgeoning LGBTQ movement that had been growing since Stonewall in 1969. In addition to gay men, they also tried to blame immigrants for the crisis, saying “foreigners” were threatening the country.

As the fear spread like wildﬁre throughout the population, the government went along with the extreme homophobia and racism that ﬁlled the airways and newspapers. Gay men were described as sexual deviants practicing unnatural and therefore sinful debauchery and leading lives of carnal decadence. Immigrants were scapegoated, as always happens during a capitalist crisis. It is diﬃcult to overestimate the intensity of the bigotry, fear-mongering and violence that dominated that period. Meanwhile, the silence from government was deafening.

Bigots went wild with their denunciations of gay men: Jerry Falwell, the spokesperson for the religious right, announced that, “AIDS is the wrath of God upon homosexuals.” President Reagan’s communications director Pat Buchanan declared that AIDS was “nature’s revenge on gay men.”

Even after it was clearly established that HIV, the virus that causes AIDS was transmitted only by unprotected sexual activity or exposure to infected blood products, and not by touching or coughing, the fear continued.

A school in Queens, New York, had to close because it was claimed that a second-grader at the school was HIV-positive. Fear-mongering politicians made a big deal of this, and 944 students out of 1100 stayed out of school.

In 1986, the house of a family in Florida was burned down after courts had ruled that their three sons, who were HIV-positive pursuant to blood transfusions of tainted blood, had to be allowed to attend school. The judge used the clear evidence that AIDS could not be spread in casual school or work-based environments.

A six-year old mentally disabled girl was ordered by a federal judge to attend a Florida school encased in a 6-by-8 foot glass booth to avoid any chance of spreading the disease.

Ryan White, the 14 year-old icon in AIDS ﬁghtback history, launched a successful ﬁght to attend a public school in Kokomo, Indiana. After winning in court, White was taunted at school by other children who wrote obscenities on his locker and shouted insults as he passed in the hallway. Vandals broke windows of the family’s house and slashed the tires of their car.

Looking back, it is diﬃcult to overestimate the intensity of the bigotry, fear-mongering and violence that dominated that period. Meanwhile, the silence from government was deafening. President Ronald Reagan and conservatives in Congress fought against bills that would fund public education to counter AIDS hysteria and promote condom use and other means of AIDS prevention.

It was not until November 1987 that Reagan even uttered the word “AIDS.”

THE FIGHT BACK

In the tradition of Stonewall and years of struggle, gay men and other supporters of LGBTQ liberation did not stand by silently as the crisis unfolded.

Militant demonstrations sprang up in San Francisco, New York, Los Angeles and cities across the country. Hundreds of thousands entered the arena of struggle to ﬁght the multi-faceted crisis known as AIDS.

Prominent individuals disclosed their HIV-positive status, sending a shock-wave throughout the country and the world. Rock Hudson, the handsome movie star, appeared in public as a gaunt and emaciated ﬁgure, and announced to the world that he had been sick for some time with AIDS. He died shortly after.

The great basketball legend, Magic Johnson, also went public with his HIV-positive status, undercutting the homophobic stereotypes surrounding AIDS.

These events shook millions of people into a sobering reality check and inspired many more to speak out in defense of those targeted by the AIDS crisis.

To break through the stigma associated with the disease, Nelson Mandela wore a t-shirt that read, “HIV positive” after it was revealed that his son had died of AIDS.

“ACT UP! FIGHT BACK!”

The mass movement of AIDS activists — which included gay, straight, men, women, and trans people — launched mass campaigns targeting the central issues surrounding the crisis.

AIDS activist groups such as ACT-UP (AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power), GMHC (Gay Mens’ Health Crisis) and others mounted massive and militant actions to demand access to experimental AIDS drugs.

In 1988 over 110 demonstrators were arrested in Wall Street in front of the New York Stock Exchange and a year later AIDS activists inﬁltrated the Stock Exchange and chained themselves to the VIP balcony demanding free drugs for people with AIDS. Many current members of the PSL participated in these actions and supported the growing militant ﬁght-back movement.

In one of the largest demonstration since the Vietnam war, tens of thousands demonstrated and shut down the Food and Drug Administration in Washington DC, demanding immediate action to manage the epidemic.

The Women’s Caucus of ACT-UP occupied the Center for Disease Control to demand that women with AIDS receive the same equal treatment as men. Instead of diagnosing women with AIDS, their disease was referred to as AIDS Related Complex (ARC) thus excluding women from the beneﬁts and care allocated by this time to men with AIDS.

DENIAL OF EDUCATION AND PREVENTION PROGRAMS

The government failed and refused to fund programs for prevention and education about the epidemic. In New York City, Cardinal O’Connor mounted a public campaign, in line with Pope John Paul II and the Catholic hierarchy, against condom distributions and safer-sex education. In response, activists disrupted mass at St. Patrick’s Cathedral where 111 protesters were arrested.

In 1991, during Operation Desert Storm, protesters entered the studio of the CBS Evening News, chanting, “AIDS is what’s news! Fight AIDS, not Arab People!”The next day activists hung banners in Grand Central Station: “Money for AIDS, Not for War” and “One AIDS death every 8 Minutes!”

CAPITALIST RULE AND THE AIDS MULTI-FACETED WORLD PANDEMIC

Millions have been lost in the United States, in Africa, in Haiti and the Caribbean, and throughout the world. Today millions more still suﬀer and are denied treatment worldwide, amounting to a massive crime against humanity for the sake of corporate proﬁts and imperialist domination.

Instead of developing a centralized plan based on science and public health, the capitalists have stood by while chaos rules, or sought to proﬁt from it. A sane, socialist, planned response to a crisis such as AIDS, could have contained the worldwide tragedy that has unnecessarily taken so many lives.

The same militancy that animated the AIDS movement must be carried forward in the ﬁght for universal health care and socialism. Stand up, ﬁght back!