

Lessons from the UPS Contract Battle: Socialists Must Be Serious Unionists, Not Amateurish ‘Left’ Critics

Husayn Karimi









<i>The following article has not yet been published and is, for now, strictly internal to PSL members.</i>

The votes have been counted: 86% of UPS workers nationwide have overwhelmingly ratiﬁed a new contract agreement, which delivers signiﬁcant wage gains, abolishes a hated two-tier classiﬁcation system and strengthens other worker protections over the next ﬁve years. The whole country had been bracing for a massive strike of 340,000 logistics, warehouse and shipping workers — an event that would have sent shockwaves through the global economy. But now it has been avoided.

The PSL mobilized its membership and supporters for the strike preparations. Our members who are at UPS and from other workplaces joined practice pickets, conducted video interviews with workers at UPS hubs and warehouses nationwide, distributed literature in working-class neighborhoods and held community forums in many cities to spread awareness of the coming strike among the working class at large. For us, no single event would show the power of the working class more than a UPS strike, and it’s a battle that all workers would have a stake in winning.

We of course were not alone in this; other leftist organizations and labor militants paid close attention to the UPS strike preparations and joined in, recognizing its signiﬁcance to the broader labor movement and working-class struggle. But when the tentative agreement came out in July, a split emerged among diﬀerent socialist groups. PSL members at UPS voted Yes on the contract, and explained why it was a signiﬁcant victory and how it was won. The victory demonstrated to millions of workers the power of organization and strike preparedness. There is no better time than now to double down eﬀorts to organize Amazon and other non-union logistics ﬁrms. Through the contract ﬁght, UPS Teamster membership and participation has expanded, better positioning them to engage in serious shop-ﬂoor ﬁghts to enforce the contract and ﬁght for an even stronger contract in the next cycle. While we met many workers who understandably wanted more, and understandably were disappointed to not have the satisfaction of seeing the company shut down, our answer was to channel that desire into making the union even stronger, activating even more of the membership for the next contract ﬁght, to organize the unorganized in the logistics industry, and to join the ﬁght against capitalism as a whole.

By contrast, several other left organizations spent the last month campaigning for a “No” vote among the workers, emphasizing (and sometimes exaggerating) the shortcomings of the contract and to varying degrees attacking the Teamster leadership. That approach has now been decisively rejected by the workers themselves, but it still needs to be learned from because it represents a case study in how socialists should not approach a contract battle. Those who want to build a class-conscious and pro-socialist element in the labor movement need to have a mature and responsible approach to contract battles. The left cannot adopt one-sided and cartoonish versions of radicalism, calling everything a “sell out” and making irresponsible empty promises that they are in no position to make real, and which do not correspond to the internal and external relationship of forces. Such infantile leftism — we won’t even call it real ultra-leftism — leaves socialists more isolated, hurts the long-term interests of building class consciousness, and opportunistically puts ﬁrst the interests of their small groups (based on accumulating small groups of frustrated workers).

The ﬁrst rule to being a good socialist unionist is to be a good unionist. In this article, we expand on what that means in a contract battle. While we typically do not focus on tactical and ideological diﬀerences with other socialists, in this case we believe a fuller discussion is instructive for a range of labor activists and young socialists who are entering the labor movement. At the core of the No campaigners’ argument is a complete misportrayal of how contract negotiations work and the very diﬃcult, complex decisions that must be made in assessing the preparedness of the membership to ﬁght for more.

VOTE YES OR VOTE NO

Socialists in the labor movement should approach every contract battle and the question of whether to vote Yes or No with a realistic sense of the correlation of forces. We cannot vote No based on whether we like the contract, or what workers deserve in the abstract, but on whether we believe workers will win more by voting No on the bosses’ ﬁnal oﬀer and going on strike instead. A strike does not in and of itself build the ﬁghting conﬁdence of the working class; successful strikes do. While some workers want to strike, understandably, simply to see the corporation shut down without their labor, in almost all cases a larger number will be anxious about losing pay and job security, and will only accept the hardships of striking as a last resort. That is especially true at a moment in history when very few workers have the experience of striking.

To make the calculation of whether the strike is likely to succeed requires knowing ﬁrst:
<br>1) Given the remaining contract issues left in dispute, how motivated and prepared is the whole membership for a strike (and this means the whole membership, not the most militant and vocal members)?
<br>2) What sort of internal contradictions and weaknesses would likely divide the membership and test the strike were it to become protracted?
<br>3) How prepared is the union ﬁnancially to endure a long strike?
<br>4) How prepared is the company and its investors to endure a strike on the remaining issues?
<br>5) What is the larger class correlation of forces in society that will be brought to bear on the strike — how will the government or courts intervene on one side, or other labor unions?
<br>6) What is the possibility that a strike could result in a weaker contract, and thus, a weaker union, and lead the workers (and the whole working class) to take negative lessons away from the strike?

These are the questions, plus a range of others, that every union leadership has to weigh before making the decision to recommend a contract to their membership. Even the most class conscious and struggle-oriented leadership has to think along these lines, and every socialist who wants to recommend a vote on a contract has to put themselves in the shoes of the leadership and think what is best for the overall working class, not just what is best for their group. Nor can they draw conclusions from anecdotal interactions with the most militant and radical workers, but a comprehensive view that includes the impact of backward workers.

It is ﬁne <i>in general circumstances</i> to agitate about what the workers “deserve” but it is totally irresponsible to use this to obscure the correlation of forces at the particular juncture of recommending Yes or No on a contract vote. Socialist Alternative, for instance, brushed over this reality to encourage workers to vote No and then raised their own contract demands from thin air – base part-time pay of $30/hr, catch-up raises of $0.75 for each year of service, at least 10,000 more 22.3 full-time combo jobs, and more. Why stop there? Why not $35/hr? Why just $0.75 for each year of service? Why just 10,000 more full-time jobs and not 20,000? After all, workers “deserve” the full fruit of their labor — so that none of the value they generate can be parasitically siphoned oﬀ into the pockets of capitalist owners and investors.

It goes without saying that none of the groups campaigning for a No vote on the contract had conducted comprehensive contract surveys anywhere like the union had in UPS warehouses and among drivers across the country to identify their key issues, take the pulse of the workers, and identify what they were willing to do to achieve them. It is not to be taken lightly by any serious socialist that the Tentative Agreement was recommended by the entirety of the union leadership, including many whose last few years of work had been built around preparing the membership to strike, and who had proven records in opposing the last sell-out previous leadership.

Another small socialist group advocated a No vote explaining: “It is the workers — not the company, not the union leadership, and not Democratic Party politicians — who get to decide if this TA is acceptable or whether they will ﬁght for more.” This is technically true, but one of these things is not like the other. UPS is a multinational monopoly corporation and the Democrats are a ruling class political party. The union is a mass organization of the working class with elected leadership! To draw an equal sign between these entities and assume they have the same interest in pacifying workers ignores their class character. The “No” campaigners’ simplistic narrative of the union rank-and-ﬁle versus the leadership simply confused things.

The “left” opportunists campaigning for a No vote left the impression that this would magically produce a better contract. In doing so, they sidestepped the main question on every worker’s mind: whether voting No would compel a strike. In fact, if the vote had been more or less split, the strike threat would be oﬀ the table and the company would have less reason to move on anything. To go even further, what would it look like to have a strike with a split membership and against the unanimous recommendation of the entire Teamsters negotiating committee from around the country (representing all its main factions), and against the recommendation of the local elected leaderships? They ducked the question of the state of consciousness of the full-time workers, whose key demands were all met in the agreement; how long would they be willing to stay out on strike on behalf of part-timers (and future part-timers)? They ducked the question of the state of organization of the part-time workforce, and how involved they would be in a strike, and for how long. They ducked the fundamental risks involved with striking — if a more combative union leadership ends up being dragged into a strike they don’t believe is necessary, and the company smells blood and decides to try and decisively weaken the union, could it produce a worse contract, and weaker union?

It is easy to say vote No on a tentative agreement, but it is totally irresponsible to do so without presenting a serious plan for workers to win more.

The important thing, in the view of the “more militant than thou” leftists, was to reject the Agreement. <b>They promoted the idea that gains are won simply by saying “yes” or “no,” rather than through real struggle.</b> This is ultimately a form of wishing on a star, even if dressed up in militant and left-wing phrases. Their objective was not to win, but to rally workers on the basis that they deserve more and recruit them to their organization of “true union militants” who proclaim from the sidelines what a “real, strong union contract would include” that they themselves have never actually won. In any case, these groups do not have nearly the depth or breadth of organization to help lead a potential strike themselves from the outside.

If winning demands were as easy as stating that they are fair and should be met, we would live in a very diﬀerent world. In the present world, union leaders and rank-and-ﬁle UPS workers have been engaged in a lengthy process of formulating proposals and a strategy to extract these concessions from a powerful corporation. The gains won in the tentative agreement represent big steps forward around many of these unifying issues. It is, of course, true that not every desired improvement was won and that workers still deserve more. That will be true of any union contract - or any other type of reform - that is won under the capitalist system. A contract with a capitalist can never resolve the fundamental injustice of working under capitalism because it by deﬁnition leaves the capitalist owner in place, extracting the value that the workers produce. It is a truce agreement that says “this is as good as we believe we can do right now.”

This does not mean socialists have to support every contract that the union leaders recommend. In 2018, for instance, our members at UPS criticized and voted against the tentative agreement negotiated by the former Teamsters leadership because we considered it a sell out deal. The former union leaders conceded to UPS management's desire to create a two-tier job classiﬁcation system without any real attempt to organize the membership to ﬁght. But this time was diﬀerent. Unlike in 2018, most core demands of the UPS Teamsters have been met. Also unlike in 2018, this year there was not a signiﬁcant, organized “Vote No” campaign from any trend in the union itself.

The No vote call from certain socialists — which was resoundingly rejected by the workers — ended up just highlighting these socialists’ distance from serious labor struggle. Fights must be escalated at moments of maximum unity. The strike authorization vote that took place earlier this summer showed exactly that kind of unity. Even if a narrow majority were to vote to reject the tentative agreement, the conditions for escalation would not exist. Calling for doing so displays a poverty of strategic thinking and a lack of appreciation for the real risks that are taken and sacriﬁces made when workers go on strike.

SOCIALISTS AND THE LABOR MOVEMENT

We believe the labor movement can be a school for workers to build their conﬁdence, their ﬁghting spirit, their overall consciousness of the capitalist system, and ultimately their desire to overturn this system and replace it with socialism. This is especially true when we draw the broadest numbers of workers into the most militant struggle against the company that conditions will allow for. The expansion of unions and use of the strike or strike threat furthers this possibility.

What socialists should be doing now is drawing attention to the real gains that have been won and, more importantly, how they were won. It was through assembling and training Contract Action Teams (CATs) made up of worker leaders who would each take responsibility for talking to their coworkers, identifying their key issues, and moving them to action at each step of the process. It was the participation of tens of thousands of UPS workers across the country mobilizing for parking lot rallies and practice pickets with their locals. It was ultimately a credible strike threat that was built through tireless, behind-the-scenes organizing that made UPS so terriﬁed that they felt it necessary to fold.

UPS was also well aware that the Teamsters had won public support well beyond the ranks of their own members. At a time when trust in nearly all major institutions is falling except labor unions, the workers at UPS won the enthusiastic support of millions of people by taking on greedy corporate executives who grew even richer during the pandemic while their employees suﬀered. This points to the role unions can play in articulating not only the demands of their members for better pay and conditions, but also the political aspirations of the broader working class. If unions took up energetic campaigns to win transformative gains like a nationwide rent freeze, universal healthcare, or free college education, their prestige would soar to new heights and huge numbers of people would be clamoring to organize their workplaces.

But workers will not draw revolutionary conclusions automatically from participation in the struggle alone, nor will it come through raising arbitrary “radical” demands from the sidelines, or even amplifying a small minority of workers on social media in the spirit of “rank-and-ﬁle-ism.” It requires the patient work of revolutionaries who prove their leadership through demonstrated commitment and who ﬁght alongside workers to draw out these lessons in the heat of conﬂicts and at their conclusions.

There are of course some Teamster members who may not be fully satisﬁed with the contract after years of abuse and exploitation. For some, there would have been nothing sweeter than witnessing their supervisors fail spectacularly at doing their job. But even they recognized the victories that have been won through organizing a credible strike threat.

The wage increases that have been achieved in this agreement are rare even for union workers. The hated two-tier 22.4 classiﬁcation that was imposed as part of the 2018 contract, negotiated by the old Hoﬀa Jr. leadership, has been done away with. Pension beneﬁts have been improved. Workers have ﬁnally won in-cab air conditioning — a victory of particular signiﬁcance for those who have seen co-workers die of heatstroke.

The impact of any class struggle ultimately can’t be measured in dollars and cents but how its lessons are threaded back into the consciousness of the working class itself. By campaigning for a No vote on an opportunist basis, these groups cast in a negative light all the gains that came from the workers’ strike preparedness, and actually promote negative lessons for future ﬁghts. In the name of militancy, they actually promote demoralization and in this sense snatch defeat from the jaws of victory.

In fact, all of the concessions of this agreement, clawed and fought for over years leading up to the agreement, are a testament to the pressure that UPS workers were able to apply on the company through rallies, practice pickets, and - most importantly - a credible strike threat. This is the lesson that must be highlighted the most, one that builds the ﬁghting spirit of workers and deepens their commitment to their union and the broader class struggle. We salute the mobilization and militancy of the UPS Teamsters — onwards to future victories!

Why Make The Union A School For Socialism?

Husayn Karimi, Emma Kinema & Michael Kramer









In the same way that a successful union organizing campaign requires a group of leaders from various work areas who are committed to pushing the campaign forward and moving their coworkers to action, so too does making a revolution in the U.S. require revolutionaries who are not only skilled organizers and educators, but are conscious of the need for socialism and are eﬀective advocates in winning over others to the cause.

So naturally, we are always thinking about how to make more revolutionaries. How are new ﬁghters for socialism forged?

Socialists have long put special signiﬁcance in participation in the labor movement, for good reason. The workplace is the site of the most fundamental feature of capitalism: exploitation of workers by their employer for proﬁt. In the workplace struggle in particular lies unique educational opportunities. When a worker is drawn into action with their coworkers against the employer for better workplace conditions, their ideas change. Because with new experiences come new ideas.

Under certain conditions, our ideas can be completely transformed. During the summer of 2020, a rebellion against police brutality and racism swept the nation and nearly 30 million people hit the streets. Demands and slogans which were once considered to be impossible or “too radical” were suddenly on the table and broadly adopted by large sectors of society. Police repression of protests in nearly every major city only contributed to people’s resolve to ﬁght and take to the streets in even larger numbers. This experience shaped the consciousness of millions of workers and oppressed people across the country, in a matter of weeks.

This example shows what we always knew to be true—when we ﬁght, we learn! And new ﬁghters and new militants are forged through struggle. Without this understanding, it is easy to resign ourselves to cynicism if no immediate, meaningful change is secured as a result of a single battle. This is why we say the end result of a struggle is not the sole criterion on which to evaluate our participation, but how did the ﬁght grow our forces for the broader war, both in volume and quality!

Whether or not meaningful reforms around policing and racism were secured, one can not contest that the impacts of the 2020 summer of rebellion reached far beyond the role of police under capitalism. By 2021, Gallup polls show that approval of labor unions reached its highest point since 1965. This was caused not only by the economic dislocation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, but this unprecedentedly massive expression of a desire to struggle against the system. The rebellion against racism was a school that taught people not only about the role of the police under capitalism, but the nature of the whole society. It is no coincidence that socialist groups, including the PSL which provided leadership to a largely spontaneous movement in many cities across the country, grew dramatically.

Similarly in the heat of battle with the boss, workers can learn how to ﬁght and lead, who to ﬁght and why, their strength as a united group of workers, and the nature of society—that in fact “yes all bosses” exploit workers and that it’s a class struggle! Our unions, which provide a vehicle and structure for mass participation of workers to ﬁght the boss, are also a school. But the militant lessons that can be learned through this ﬁght are not automatic. If this were the case, everyone who engaged in a bitter struggle with their coworkers against their boss would be a socialist. In order for the union to be a school for socialism, we need revolutionary socialist teachers. This is where leadership plays a decisive role.

LEARNING THE RIGHT LESSONS

For unions to be an eﬀective school for socialism, we must draw clear lessons about who we are as a working class and about who our enemies are. These lessons are encouraged by the type of struggles that we engage in—the broadest, most militant ﬁghts are best for exposing that the conﬂict is not contained to a particular workplace or industry. These ﬁghts teach the lesson that this conﬂict is between opposed classes and stretches across the entire society. The struggle itself is rich with these lessons, but they have to be drawn out. To draw out correct lessons, our orientation and focus matters. The drawing of correct lessons is best done through an orientation that is primarily outward looking, rather than inward looking. That is to say, we should keep our main focus on how our unions ﬁt into the struggles across the broader society and not be overly focused on processes and internal union dynamics.

What lessons are drawn from having a primary focus on democratic process or “union bureaucrats?” Such a focus sends the message that our primary enemy is within our unions, rather than outside. It also encourages an overestimation of the readiness of our forces to win the battles before us. It leads to the view that says that the only thing holding our class back from militant struggle are the machinations of union leaders. If only this were so.

This is not to say that union democracy is unimportant or to say that bureaucratic union structures are not an obstacle. There is a truth to these observations. There is also truth in the observation that, at times, union members are more willing and ready to ﬁght than union leaders. But these are supplemental – and only sometimes true – lessons. If we make the union struggle into an eﬀective school, supplemental lessons will be drawn out along the way. As socialists, our role should be to always bring those broader lessons into focus. We do this by keeping our main ﬁre always aimed at the primary enemy. This is not only the most strategically eﬀective course, but the course that allows the struggle to be an eﬀective teacher.

A clear focus on who the real enemy is should not translate into a narrowness that ignores the varied forms of oppression that the United States is built on. Unions can be made into the most eﬀective school for teaching the possibility and necessity of multinational unity among the working class. This lesson has historically been best learned, not through ignoring the eﬀects of white supremacy and the national oppression of Black people in the United States, but by openly and tirelessly confronting them.

In the 1930s, the Communist Party of the United States used unions as precisely this kind of school. The Communists of this period were ﬁrm in their commitment to Black self-determination and full equality in the union and the workplace. The Communist-led union ﬁghts against the color line had numerous important eﬀects, but among them was the education through practice that they provided for their participants. These lessons were particularly noteworthy for white workers, who were steeped in racist ideology. The lessons on the possibility of Black national liberation and multinational working class unity were instructive to all, however, including to the Communists themselves.

FROM THE BATTLE TO THE WAR

As militant trade unionists we understand that wins derived from union struggles are temporary in nature and always under threat of attack by the boss and the capitalist class. Improvements won through good union organizing are deeply valuable, and essential, for the wellbeing of the working class—they can mean the diﬀerence between making rent and homelessness, providing good education for our children or not, being able to access quality healthcare or not. But as essential as those reforms are in our work lives, they are ultimately concessions from the boss and can be taken away by the boss.

This is why as revolutionary socialists in the labor movement, we see the urgent and essential need for building our unions into schools for socialism and through our movement's struggles develop revolutionary consciousness among members of our class. Our mission as organizers is to develop the class consciousness and skills of every member of the working class. To achieve a world run by working people for working people our class needs the ability to take and wield political power for the sake of building a socialist society.

If our boss doesn't show up to work, work continues on. If workers don't show up to work, everything grinds to a halt. As ﬁghters for the working class, we know that workers make the world run, and so workers should run the world.

Many progressive and radical union organizers and leaders have a vision for society—a world beyond capitalism and exploitation. And yet how do we connect our day-to-day struggle in our unions to that long term political vision we share for our future? To seize political power away from the capitalist class, the working and oppressed peoples must be able navigate and struggle politically on a society-wide scale. It is not enough to build power in our workplaces, in our companies, or even in our entire industries—we must build an organization that cuts across all of our industries, our unions, and our social movements. We need a disciplined organization of revolutionaries that can run through the whole of our working class—binding it together and making it stronger. This is the role of a revolutionary socialist party in labor.

Organized labor, ready to leverage against the ruling class is essential to overturning the rule of capital, beginning the development of socialism, and building a more just world for all working people. To achieve this vision we must bind together our political struggles and our union struggles—we must organize not just our unions, but a party. This is why socialists in the labor movement must struggle to develop our unions into not just as ﬁghting organizations engaged in class struggle but schools for socialism.

Training to Move Millions Through the Labor Movement

Nathalie Hrizi, Husayn Karimi & Mike Kramer









In January of 2022, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) released its annual report on union representation of the workforce in the United States. The numbers show the continued slow decline in the percentage of U.S. workers who are members of a union. Currently, only 10.6% of workers are represented by a union, a decline of nearly half since 1983, when the BLS ﬁrst began collecting this data. Even these bleak numbers fail to adequately convey the weakened state of the US labor movement. The number is largely propped up by the public sector, as the private sector unionization rate is 6.1%, and by a handful of mostly coastal states. In much of the deep South, organized labor scarcely exists and certainly not as a major political or economic force.

The dismal tale told by the above numbers is not the whole story, however. Despite the sober reckoning demanded by these statistics, we can also see ample evidence of the seeds of a revitalized labor movement. Union victories at corporate behemoths like Amazon and Starbucks are making headlines in the bourgeois press. Organizing eﬀorts have begun in industries previously devoid of any union presence including notable eﬀorts in the tech industry. In late 2021, a wave of labor stoppages was dubbed “Striketober” as workers at major employers across a number of major employers engaged in militant strikes. The increasing trade union consciousness and militancy among teachers’ unions has continued to develop in recent years.

These struggles and more show that unions and union organizing have a prominence of place in the public consciousness that has not existed for decades. The labor struggles mentioned above are tiny compared to the largest scale eﬀort by the working class to exercise some control over the labor market. Alternately dubbed the Great Resignation or the Big Quit, 2021 saw record high quit rates (the percentage of workers voluntarily leaving their jobs). While right wing politicians blamed this phenomenon on what they considered to be overly generous pandemic unemployment beneﬁts, the reality is that workers in a tight labor market had (and as of this writing, continue to have) an atypical ability to demand higher wages and abandon jobs which fail to pay them.

While the Great Resignation shows the power of the working class in a certain sense, it is also a deeply individualized phenomenon. Organized, collective action has played little role. When we consider that a 2021 Gallup poll showed that support for unions is at the highest level in the United States (68%) since 1965, the question becomes quite glaring – why has unprecedented support for unionization and an unprecedented level of worker action in response to job dissatisfaction not yet produced a true upsurge of union organizing? To answer this question we must look to the current state of the US labor movement and the role that the PSL can play within it.

WHY ORGANIZED LABOR?

The aforementioned decline in union density notwithstanding, 14 million workers in the United States are represented by labor unions. Despite its decline in relation to job growth, the labor movement remains a powerful force in the economy and is the largest site of ongoing, organized working class struggle. Members of our class may be driven into a variety of struggles by the realities of life under capitalism, but it is primarily in the trade union struggle where workers enter into struggle as workers and where the basic conﬂict between the working class and the ruling class is made most clear. There is also a relative predictability to this struggle in comparison to other types of mass upsurges, most of which have a more spontaneous character.

This predictability grows out of the dual nature of trade unionism under capitalism. On the one hand, unions are the basic form of working class resistance to capitalist exploitation. Workers form together in unions to demand better terms for the sale of their labor power in the form of direct wages, beneﬁts and conditions of work. The collective power of the working class is demonstrated in miniature in each trade union struggle as workers use collective action and, at times, the ability to withhold their own labor power in order to win better conditions of work and life. The open conﬂict between the working class and the capitalists that is put on display in strikes is what led Lenin to refer to this form of labor struggle as a “school of war.” They are not the working class ﬁghting for control of the economy and society as a whole, but a battle over the immediate demands and needs of a subset of the class.

Because the trade unions enter into a battle which is not intended to upend the existing society, they must also eventually negotiate a peace that conforms to the logic of that society. That is to say, better terms for the exploitation of labor are secured but the exploitation itself continues. This is the other aspect of trade unionism under capitalism – unions are the form in which struggle is unleashed and the form in which labor peace is secured. This is not entirely negative and we should not let it lead us to facile criticisms of the trade union struggle or of its leadership. The securing of peace contains the most militant struggle, but it also secures the fruits of struggle in the form of collective bargaining agreements that improve the living standards of union members. On the other hand, a rush to peace can lead to the most conservative and demobilizing versions of unionism. Navigating the pulls of these two opposed aspects of trade unionism is a question of leadership.

THE STATE OF THE LABOR MOVEMENT

The leadership of the U.S. labor movement since the middle of the 20th Century is notable for its political backwardness. Despite the prominent role of socialists and communists as labor leaders in the 1920s-1940s, the left was purged from union leadership following the passage of the Taft-Hartley Act. While there have been more and less progressive elements within the labor oﬃcialdom, it has largely served as a headquarters of bourgeois ideology within the working class movement. This is reﬂected in a slavish devotion to the Democratic Party, no matter how many times this same party refuses to advance a pro-labor legislative agenda. It is reﬂected in the foreign policy positions championed by the oﬃcialdom – whether it be hostility to China, support for Israel or unwillingness to criticize US military adventures.

It is important to understand the roots of this political backwardness, rather than approaching it with a dogmatic perspective. Unions in the United States are in a constant battle for survival in an extremely hostile political and legal landscape. There is no mass labor-oriented political party for the unions to relate to. While we do not support acting in the role of reliable champions of the Democratic Party, it is something that we must understand. As the battle for survival has intensiﬁed, so has the openness of the labor movement leadership to alternative approaches to addressing the long crisis in labor.

This openness is partially due to the fact that the leadership of the AFL-CIO unions, as well as those outside of the federation, has gone through a period of transition in recent decades. Once derided as “male, pale, and stale” the face of union leadership has gone through some change, albeit partial. Much of the fundamental orientation has remained intact, but with some important shifts. One of these is a near hegemonic embrace of the need for the “organizing model” of unionism to supplant the “service model.” The latter model views unions as a set of services provided to members in exchange for dues payments – it is inherently demobilizing and disempowering. The organizing model is based on the need to mobilize union membership to eﬀectively win gains and the need to aggressively pursue organizing of non-union employers. Pro-organizing rhetoric has not resulted in action and expenditure of resources in all unions, but it does reﬂect a change in priorities and focus. This partial embrace of organizing and a general spirit of openness motivated by organized labor’s quest for survival creates an important opportunity for intervention by the PSL and for the advancement of a vision of unionism based in class struggle. Taking advantage of this opportunity is essential for both the revitalization of labor and for the building of the revolutionary socialist movement in the United States.

THE ROLE OF THE PSL IN THE TRADE UNION STRUGGLE

PSL cadres in labor should always be focused on fostering the most militant versions of trade unionism that conditions will allow for. Our focus should be a trade unionism that embodies class struggle – one that is focused on organizing the unorganized, bringing the broadest section of workers possible into open confrontation with the employers, and using tactics and slogans that lay bare the true nature of our society.

This vision cannot be realized by wishing it into being. It requires that cadres be the most eﬀective and dedicated organizers within their unions. It requires that we always engage in, as Lenin urged, “the concrete analysis of concrete conditions.” We will not be an eﬀective force in the unions by having a dogmatic adherence to calls for strikes or other militant tactics when conditions do not allow for them. Instead, we must build the forces necessary to both ﬁght eﬀectively and to win all that can be won.

Our activity in the trade unions must embody what the PSL stands for politically. This does not mean making abstract declarations about socialism or revolutionary struggle. It does mean that we build class consciousness and attempt to win the more politically advanced workers to the Party. It does mean maintaining a strategic focus on struggles against national oppression and attempting to utilize unions as vehicles for the struggle for Black liberation. It does mean confronting male chauvinism and advancing the leadership of women and other gender-oppressed people in the workplace and in the labor movement. It also means confronting the complicity of the upper echelons of labor leadership with US imperialism and promoting an internationalist alternative. Regardless of any positions we hold in unions, the goal of the PSL members is to raise class consciousness among our fellow workers.

In diﬀerent moments and contexts, there will be more or less space to pursue a combative, class struggle-oriented vision of unionism without clashing with the existing leadership of the trade unions. When our vision and theirs are opposed, it is important for us to remember that the leadership of the labor movement is not the main enemy. While some on the left have treated the struggle against “labor bureaucrats” as if it is the primary obstacle holding back the working class movement, we must always remember that our main enemy is the ruling class.

The diﬀerences here are worth dissecting. We are trying to make a revolution, and that requires revolutionaries. We know revolutionaries are forged through struggle, under the right leadership.

This is why we participate in reform struggles. In the case of workplace struggles, we are able to draw workers into a popular confrontation with their employer. And in these ﬁghts lies a major educational opportunity to teach our coworkers, grounded in their own experience facing resistance from their employer, not only how to ﬁght and the strength they can wield with their coworkers, but also about the nature of capitalism and introduce and win them over to an alternative, socialism. So our objective should be to draw workers into a struggle where all these lessons can be drawn out.

We should aim our ﬁre at the primary enemy - the ruling-class - and build the broadest unity possible among the workers camp. Consider the scenario of a union public school teacher whose union is in bargaining and the main issue is class sizes. This teacher is not involved in their union, and although all the teachers at their site all deeply resonate with the class size issue, their school isn’t organized to do anything about it. They get a report from coworkers on the bargaining committee that no progress has been made on the issue. There are two possible conclusions this teacher can make - and what we say in this moment can make the diﬀerence. If we say “the reason we won’t get smaller class sizes is because the union leadership isn’t ﬁghting hard enough”, we are telling our coworker that they can’t do anything to change the situation. Even if it were true that the union leadership was overly conciliatory, this orientation is totally inactionable and it gives the wrong idea for why things are the way they are. On the other hand, if we lay the blame ﬁrmly on the DOE, budget cuts, etc. and argue that only by getting coworkers organized at the school can we pressure the city to bargain over smaller class sizes, we are drawing our coworker into action where the correct lessons can be learned. Militancy in the leadership cannot compensate for disorganization among the membership.

As the work of the PSL within the labor movement grows, we should aim to be seen as an identiﬁable and leading force within a militant pole of the labor movement. Such a pole cannot simply be a collection of labor leftists, but must include all of the varied forces who are seeking to build a ﬁghting and progressive labor movement in the United States. Among this trend, we should strive for our forces to be seen in the way that they are in many other social movements – serious, multinational, intergenerational, and composed of the best ﬁghters in the movement. Ultimately, our Party should strive to take formal leadership of many unions. This leadership must be earned through winning the trust of workers in the course of many battles. Decisions to contest for leadership should not be taken lightly. The fusion of Marxism with the workers movement will not be possible without having substantial formal and informal leadership across labor. This is not on the immediate agenda, but we must be preparing for it now.

AN IDEAL TRAINING GROUND FOR CADRES

As we approach the 5th Party Congress, the PSL has focused on the need to train cadres in this period so that we are prepared to provide leadership at the necessary scale when the next period of crisis begins. The document “Training to Move People in the Millions and Win the Working Class to the Socialist Program” explains that:

style = "margin-left:15px">"We are training to be political ﬁghters capable of moving masses of working class people in the struggle. In order to do this, every member of the PSL needs to be able to identify and clearly speak to the most pressing concerns on workers’ minds. This agitation needs to deal with the concrete realities in society and present on both immediate demands and how the socialist program contains the ultimate solution to the injustice in question. If we are consistently able to do this, we can earn the trust of a large section of our class as the political force best able to provide answers to the crises engulﬁng society.”

While this training to move masses must take place across the Party’s various areas of work, the labor movement provides an ideal training ground for cadres. Socialists attempting to organize in the workplace have no choice but to speak popularly and to “meet people where they are at.” Unlike community organizations or issue-based organizations, unions and workplaces are composed of a limited number of people. They are not people who seek out struggle – they are drawn into it simply because of where they happened to get a job. In that sense, unions do not choose their own members. Rather, their enemy – the boss – chooses the union’s members for them. In order to win recognition or secure a strong contract, comrades have to work to unite the majority.

To move workplace majorities into action requires patient listening and deep agitation with individual workers. It requires letting go of jargon that we sometimes rely on and a willingness to take the time to walk people to the correct conclusions, rather than lecture them. It requires using the motivating power of anger and of hope to overcome the debilitating power of fear and futility. Comrades engaged in workplace organizing will be forced to develop these skills rapidly in order to succeed.

Additionally, successful labor organizing requires comrades to train themselves in the overall landscape of a complicated movement. It is important to understand the basic legal frameworks in which unions operate in the United States. It is important to understand the major leaders, organizations, and trends within the modern labor movement. Our cadre can’t have a simplistic or anachronistic understanding of this landscape if we are to eﬀectively maneuver within it.

HOW TO BE A GOOD COMMUNIST IN THE UNION MOVEMENT

What do we want individual PSL members to do in labor? First, it is always better if they are not lone individuals. Concentration of forces is an important strategic principle for communist workplace organizing. The diﬀerence between what can be accomplished by a lone comrade in a particular workplace or union and what can be accomplished by two or three comrades who are coordinating their activity is astronomical. We are not at a level of development in our work where it makes sense to have an exclusive strategic focus on certain industries at a national level, but this may be a question we need to grapple with soon. For now, it is enough that as many comrades as possible think about where they work as a political question. Doing so means having an openness to changing jobs in order to be in an organizing concentration with other comrades.

Whether alone or as a group, comrades entering into a workplace where they intend to organize should do so with the desire to lead, but with the humility and patience to earn that leadership. Chinese Communist Mao Zedong, like many revolutionary leaders, challenged the cadres of the Party to “be good at learning.” We, too, must be good at learning when we hope to lead. When we start a new job, we should learn it well. We should be a reliable co-worker to those around us. We should learn as much as possible about the social environment that we will be organizing in.

Being a good leader means building relationships. Having the smartest thing to say or the best analysis will not be suﬃcient for others to feel conﬁdent following you into battle. Deep trust is necessary for that and such trust must be built step by step. Building relationships with organic leaders across the workplace – those who are most respected and trusted by groups of co-workers – is what allows us to most reliably move majorities into action. If our comrades are positioned to do this, our Party will be positioned to be the leading force in more unionization campaigns, contract ﬁghts, and strikes.

A critical task of a communist in the union movement is that of summation. It is not just to lead workers into struggle. The proven leadership in a struggle must be used to introduce new political ideas and win our coworkers over to the socialist program. Every step and every twist and turn is an opportunity for education. After the immediate battle ends, the battle for summation must begin. Working with the most advanced around us to draw the key lessons of victories and defeats provides the greatest opportunity for shifts in consciousness. These

lessons should not only point towards how to be more eﬀective union ﬁghters, but also to draw out the nature of the entire system outside of the immediate workplace - i.e. why do all employers ﬁght. And even further, these lessons should also make clear that unions alone will not liberate our class. This is where our work in the labor movement connects most directly with winning the working class to the socialist program. Through shoulder to shoulder work and ongoing education, we can turn workers into union militants and union militants into revolutionaries ﬁghting towards the socialist transformation of society.

FROM LEADERS OF THE UNIONS, TO LEADERS OF THE NATION

A revolutionary socialist party that can lead a signiﬁcant section of the working class must have a deep relationship with the basic ﬁghting organizations of the working-class, the unions. The PSL has taken signiﬁcant steps since the 4th Party Congress to build our presence in the labor movement. As we approach the 5th Party Congress, this commitment to building the labor movement and our presence in it must be reaﬃrmed and deepened. In the coming years, we must position our forces and train the cadres who can lead a revitalized labor movement and win it to the socialist program.

“Left-Wing” Communism: an Infantile Disorder

Vladimir Lenin

<i>Recommended Reading.</i>
<i>The whole text of “‘Left-Wing’ Communism: an Infantile Disorder” is recommended reading, and is available <a href=”https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1920/lwc/”>here</a>. Chapter Seven “Should Revolutionaries Work in Reactionary Trade Unions?” is especially recommended and linked to below.</i>

SHOULD REVOLUTIONARIES WORK IN REACTIONARY TRADE UNIONS?

The German “Lefts” consider that, as far as they are concerned, the reply to this question is an unqualiﬁed negative. In their opinion, declamations and angry outcries (such as uttered by K. Horner in a particularly “solid” and particularly stupid manner) against “reactionary” and “counter-revolutionary” trade unions are suﬃcient “proof” that it is unnecessary and even inexcusable for revolutionaries and Communists to work in yellow, social-chauvinist, compromising and counter-revolutionary trade unions of the Legien type.

However ﬁrmly the German “Lefts” may be convinced of the revolutionism of such tactics, the latter are in fact fundamentally wrong, and contain nothing but empty phrases.

To make this clear, I shall begin with our own experience, in keeping with the general plan of the present pamphlet, which is aimed at applying to Western Europe whatever is universally practicable, signiﬁcant and relevant in the history and the present-day tactics of Bolshevism.

<a href=”https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1920/lwc/ch06.htm”>Read more</a>