The above section provides an overview of the type of mass support needed for revolutionary strategy, laying out the basic numbers of the working class and particular communities of oppressed people in contradiction with the capitalist state. The role of the party is to be able to lead across many diﬀerent sectors, communities and struggles, to synthesize from the existing struggles <b>a general line of march in the interest of the whole working class</b>. This process is easy to declare on paper, but in practice it of course proceeds unevenly, with twists and curves, distortions, mistakes and contradictions.

A key strategic goal in relation to mass organizing is to orient our program and demands to build class consciousness among the 140 million people who are in or near poverty, the base of the working class. As we go lower into the proletariat, the composition is more heavily composed of women, oppressed nationalities and LGBTQ people than the middle and upper classes. This fact shows the possibility for the working class elements to give leadership to all these struggles for genuine democracy and equality — against the petit bourgeois and bourgeois elements — and also for the specially oppressed to give leadership to the whole class.

Many on the left are only consumed with the question of simply what is the “right line” in the abstract, because they do not have a mass audience on their mind, and they aren’t thinking about moving millions of people to actually win. By contrast, the magnitude of this mission guides us at all times — when we discuss and debate politics, it is not for the mere sake of debate. That is what’s on our mind when we consider how to organize our meetings, what to speak about, how to speak online, in our classrooms, workplaces, and so on. This guides us as we build structures and routines within the party itself. We want to recruit and train leaders, while raising class consciousness among many tens of millions;

This means challenging ourselves too. The revolutionary party oﬀers camaraderie and acceptance to people of all backgrounds who come to ﬁght for a better world. But given that it is but a detachment and reﬂection of the working class itself, as well as individuals from other layers, it will never be fully exempt from the contradictions and divisions of society. Building a mass revolutionary socialist party based on the multinational working class, against all the tools and weapons of the bourgeoisie and petit-bourgeoisie within the belly of the U.S. Empire, is the hardest thing to do in the world.

This requires enough openness to learn from those we are trying to draw in, enough patience to allow people to correct mistakes, and also enough ﬁrmness to combat those inﬂuences which if introduced into the party would make it impossible for us to endure as a group, or to ever reach the scale we need. It also requires us to embrace that our mission — to build a militant movement armed with revolutionary consciousness to overthrow the greatest Empire in world history — is by deﬁnition not a safe endeavor. It will be hard and carries with it risks.

As revolutionaries, we each accept the responsibility of resolving the contradictions among the working class (who are divided ideologically and materially in 1,000 diﬀerent ways) in such a fashion as to strengthen their capacity and conﬁdence to ﬁght against a common foe. That common foe is a ruling class that is not only the most violent, brutal and abusive in history, but sophisticated and smart in preventing the consolidation of a broad working-class revolutionary political pole. They are experts in diverting the people’s resistance to oppression into atomized pockets and niches, where they are more easily controlled, bought oﬀ and repressed.

In the ﬁeld of mass organizing, there is no single front of struggle that best serves all our tasks. Insofar as the Party can elaborate a mass organizing strategy at this moment, the most important thing is 1) an orientation towards the interests of poor and working-class people; and 2) full-scale participation in all the spontaneous democratic and class struggles, at the point of struggle itself, wherever it breaks out or where we can help it break out.

These two planks can in some moments be in tension with one another insofar as pre-existing working-class struggles and spontaneous struggles are disconnected from one another. That may pull us in diﬀerent directions in practical terms. The task of our members and leadership will be to ﬁgure out organizational methods to synchronize this work, to be able to spin on a dime as the struggle shifts. In our culture, which is so dominated now by social media and mainstream media, we have to recognize that the topics driving political discussion and consciousness often shift dynamically; the notion that “bread and butter” issues are all that’s on people’s minds is false.

We believe the distinction made between the largely spontaneous “protest movement” and ongoing “base-building” is often exaggerated; these are only operating in diﬀerent categories because of the organizational weaknesses of the revolutionary left in the U.S. “Organizing” and “mobilizing” are not opposites; “mobilizing” is a mass organizing tactic, an intervention aimed at demonstrating collective power and raising class consciousness. Because the left has few cadres and resources, sometimes it feels forced to choose between these orientations. But it doesn’t have to be so.

We have to be creative in how we thread these types of mass organizing together. So for instance — how do we intervene in a spontaneous struggle that may appear “unrelated” so that it links the spontaneous struggle together with the long-term interests of the working class and thus raises consciousness for all? On the ﬂip side, how does our organizing of poor and working-people take up the whole range of national and international political issues dominating the headlines, which allows us to draw people from this work into spontaneous protests. If we’ve done our organizing work well — rather than fall into the single-issue organizing conceptions of the NGOs — there should be no great problem to cancel a tenant meeting, for instance, to mobilize for an important protest against child detention or in defense of a targeted nation abroad.

In bigger cities in particular we are generally outmatched in terms of resources and political inﬂuence by the NGOs. In smaller cities and in places outside the main political centers of the bourgeoisie, the ﬁeld of organizing may be more open. But there are openings everywhere. Every locality has working-class people who are completely unorganized, and in this political / social media moment all national and international political crises register immediately everywhere and can become the basis for local organizing. Even small all-white conservative towns of a few thousand people saw recent protests against family separation and child detention at the border (and therefore experienced more pitched confrontations than the protests in more liberal places).

Multiple forms of organizing and agitation are necessary for us to continuously train ourselves as organizers and leaders, to be able to respond quickly and eﬀectively to times of crisis, and to reach the scale of a revolutionary process in the United States. Our top mission is to recruit into our ranks those ﬁghters and existing leaders who can take the Party for Socialism and Liberation to the next level, in anticipation of the current counter-revolutionary era of politics ﬁnally giving way to revolutionary possibilities.